Knee osteoarthritis (KOA) is the most common musculoskeletal disorder and one of the leading causes of activity limitations and physical disability in older adults. Accurate and timely diagnosis of knee osteoarthritis is essential for effective treatment and intervention. This research paper presents an innovative approach to KOA classification using machine learning techniques. In this study, we used a comprehensive dataset containing 8260 knee X-ray images of KOA patients and healthy subjects collected by experts over 10 years. Our goal was to develop a robust machine-learning model capable of accurately classifying the severity of knee OA based on the radiographic features. The methodology involved, localizing the knee from the X-ray images to extract relevant features as well as splitting the dataset into training, validation, and testing in a way that ensures its generalization ability to the real-world data. The model was trained using various techniques such as Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), Res-net, VGG, Dense-net, and InceptionV3. However, the original X-ray dataset did not ensure good results for our deep learning models therefore we went with multi-step diagnostic approach. To facilitate a multi-step diagnostic approach, two additional datasets were derived from the original dataset with the five classes (0-4). The first dataset was created by merging classes 0 and 1, representing a negative diagnosis of KOA, while classes 2, 3, and 4 were combined to represent a positive diagnosis. The second dataset was designed to determine the severity of KOA and was generated by excluding classes 0 and 1, focusing on the classification between classes 2, 3, and 4. These two derived datasets were developed to enable a multi-step classification approach, with the first step detecting the presence of   KOA and the second step determining the severity of the condition. On the training process, while all our model apart from CNN were fine-tuned transfer learning models, for CNN we first trained our models on the whole dataset containing all 5 classes and then those models were fine tuned to their specific use-cases that include binary and multiclass classification. Our experimental results demonstrate promising performance, with the CNN accuracy of 79% for binary and 81% for multiclass, the Res-net 63% for binary and 48% for multiclass, the VGG 72% for binary and 68% for multiclass, the Dense-net 74% binary and 62% for multiclass, and the InceptionV3 72% for binary and 51% for multiclass. For our best binary CNN model, a precision of 0.76, recall of 0.91, and an F1-score of 0.83 were recorded. Furthermore, for our best multiclass CNN model, the precision of 0.86, recall of 0.92, and an F1-score of 0.89 was recorded.
